OBSDOCS-1126: LokistackSchemaUpgradesRequired in the upgrade process to Logging 5.9 (#85726)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/logging-upgrading-clo.adoc

.Procedure

> . Optional: When upgrading to the {clo} 5.9 or later, you must add the `v13` schema version to the `LokiStack` custom resource before the upgrade:

Reviewer: 1) From 5.9, Lokistack support schema v13.  You can use the `v13` schema version to the `LokiStack` .

Author: > I can not add v13 piror 5.9

Is the v12/v13 a breaking change?
Is it okay for users to upgrade to 5.9 with v12 and without v 13?

Reviewer: Yes.

Reviewer: We must use schema: v13 if when logs are forward using OTLP format.  OTLP is TP feature in 6.x.

Reviewer 2: The schema must be changed always after upgrading and it can't be done before. The reason is because the Loki version used in Logging 5.8 doesn't support the schema v13 and the good part is that the verification is avoiding to make this mistake:

```
$ oc get csv |grep -i loki
loki-operator.v5.8.15                       Loki Operator                                    5.8.15                     loki-operator.v5.8.14            Succeeded

// when tried to create in Loki 5.8 with v13
$ oc create -f logging-loki-cr.yaml 
The LokiStack "logging-loki" is invalid: spec.storage.schemas[0].version: Unsupported value: "v13": supported values: "v11", "v12"

// when tried to edit Loki 5.8 before upgrading
# lokistacks.loki.grafana.com "logging-loki" was not valid:
# * spec.storage.schemas[1].version: Unsupported value: "v13": supported values: "v11", "v12"
```

Then, the steps are:
1. Upgrade to Logging 6 or Logging 5.9
2. Alert `LokistackSchemaUpgradesRequiredp will be triggered indicating that needed to upgrade the  schema
3. Add the schema v13

Author: Thank you so much, both of you.

+
[source,yaml]
----
spec:
# ...
  storage:
    schemas:
    - effectiveDate: "<yyyy>-<mm>-<dd>" # <1>
      version: v12
    - effectiveDate: "<yyyy>-<mm>-<dd>" # <2>
      version: v13 # <3>
# ...
----

> <1> You can set today's date. Later, after the `effectiveDate` date of the new `v13` schema version, you can remove the `v12` schema version.

Reviewer 2: It's not a "You can", it's a must as said in the upstream doc [0]:

  "for a new install, this must be a date in the past, use a recent date. Format is YYYY-MM-DD."

But, in the upgrade example, it's not relevant here as it's expected this entry exists and what's the important is to add the second containing the new schema

[0] https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/operations/storage/schema/#new-loki-installs

Reviewer: I think that is an existing  item, isn't it? If yes. we have to remove 'You can set today's date'.

Reviewer 2: Yes, it's the existent, then, that's not relevant and it could be removed.

Author: Thank you. Editing.

> <1> You can set today's date. Later, after the `effectiveDate` date of the new `v13` schema version, you can remove the `v12` schema version.

Reviewer: Remove 'You can set today's date', as this an existing value.

> <2> You can set tomorrow's date or another future date.

Reviewer 2: This is not a "You can", it's a "must" as it's said in the upstream documentation [0] where it's possible to read:
"Loki must have a date in the future to be able to transition to the new schema when that date and time arrives."

A second warning that should be said is also the same observed in the upstream documentation [0] where it's said:

"Be aware of your relation to UTC when using the current date. Make sure that UTC 00:00:00 has not already passed for your current date."

[0] https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/operations/storage/schema/#changing-the-schema

Reviewer: The new schema must be added after the existent one.  ---->   The new schema must be added, you can not update the existing schema.

Author: Thank you so much, Oscar. Edited.

> <2> You can set tomorrow's date or another future date.

Reviewer: You **must** set tomorrow's date or another future date

.Procedure

. Optional: When upgrading to the {clo} 5.9 or later, you must add the `v13` schema version to the `LokiStack` custom resource before the upgrade:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: loki.grafana.com/v1
kind: LokiStack
# ...
spec:
# ...
  storage:
    schemas: # <1>
    - effectiveDate: "<yyyy>-<mm>-<past_dd>" # <2>
      version: v12 # <3>
    - effectiveDate: "<yyyy>-<mm>-<future_dd>" # <4>
      version: v13 # <5>
# ...
----

> <1> Upgrading to the {clo} 5.9 or later without the `v13` schema version in the `LokiStack` custom resource will result in a web console warning.

Reviewer 2: I feel the example and comments should be maintained the simplest possible. 

Then, the sentence below should go better out of the explanation of the fields in the example:

_"Upgrading to the {clo} 5.9 or later without the `v13` schema version in the `LokiStack` custom resource will result in a web console warning."_ 

It could be inside or to a continuation of the sentence:

 _"Optional: When upgrading to the {clo} 5.9 or later, you must add the v13 schema version to the LokiStack custom resource before the upgrade"_

But, if we try to join both phrases to be only one, it could be:

_"Optional: When upgrading to the {clo} 5.9 or later, you must add the v13 schema version to the LokiStack custom resource before the upgrade or it will result in a web console warning":_

And in this way, you could remove the explanation from the example

Author: I've moved to after the yaml block.
I wouldn't add it into the main sentence of the step to avoid making it confusing for readers.

Author: > I feel the example and explanations should be maintained the simplest possible.

+1

Thank you for your feedback. I've rewritten these lines.

<2> Keep the previously set date value.

> <3> Later, after the `effectiveDate` date of the `v13` schema version, you can remove the `v12` schema version.

Reviewer 2: I'd make it simplest leaving only in <2> something like:

<2> Don't delete the current schema definition or data won't be accesible.

Author: If we tell the users to keep `v12`, they will keep it, but will they need it in the LokiStack CR afterwards? Imagine I am a user, and I'm wondering why I should keep `v12` there.

Reviewer 2: If an error is done when editing, the collectors won't be able to write new logs and an user  won't be able to see the logs stored in the permanent storage. Then, the impact is bigger and it could need longer explanation (this explanation is in the upstream) for recovering the visibility of the logs if the details in how it was before remains in some place.

Being present the old schema entry is not a problem per se, when not more logs with the current schema as deleted, then, those lines continue in the configuration, but they are not doing anything. 

I don't feel that "deleting" an old schema should be part of the upgrade activity where it should be maintained the simplest possible focusing in the upgrade steps. 

How to recover from a wrong deletion of the schema, in case that desired to document, it should be in a different section where also explained how to recover from that situation. Then, as said, let's try to get the update section clear, simple and if someone requires it, then, it should be documented out of the upgrade process, for example in "maintaining loki" or whatever other section for Loki.

<4> Set a future date, such as tomorrow's date, which has not yet started in the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) time zone.

> <5> Add the `v13` schema version under the `v12` schema version. 

Reviewer 2: I'd delete the points 4 and 5 to simplify them and I'll write only <3> where it could be

<3> Add the new schema definition after the current being `effectiveDate` as a future date, such as tomorrow's date, which has not yet started in the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) time zone and  `v13` as schema `version` to be used.

I shouldn't mention anything about deleting the old in the future as it's not needed and in case that someone had a misunderstanding, the access to the data would be lost, something that we don't desire

Author: I've deleted point 5.

However, are you sure that you want me to delete point 4?
The reason I'm asking is because I added it in response to your comment in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/85726#discussion_r1869178626.

Reviewer 2: I need to apologize, let's forget about the "numbers". Really, I was proposing to merge the these point 4 and 5 to be like only one with a content similar to the one below where it continues being explained the field `effectiveDate`  as you were writing:

`Add the new schema definition after the current existing one being the value of the `effectiveDate` as a future date, such as tomorrow's date, which has not yet started in the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) time zone and the value of the schema `version` v13.

Author: Thank you for the explanation. I've rewritten those lines.

. Click the *Red Hat OpenShift Logging* Operator.

. Click *Subscription*. In the *Subscription details* section, click the *Update channel* link. This link text might be *stable* or *stable-5.<y>*, depending on your current update channel.

> . In the *Change Subscription Update Channel* window, select the latest major version update channel, *stable-5.<y>*, and click *Save*. Note the `cluster-logging.v5.<y>.<z>` version.

Reviewer 3: fwiw: "major version" would mean 6.y (6.0 or 6.1 depending on your cluster version) at this point. The latest and last minor release of 5 is 5.9.

. Wait for a few seconds, and then go to *Operators* -> *Installed Operators* to verify that the {clo} version matches the latest `cluster-logging.v5.<y>.<z>` version.

. On the *Operators* -> *Installed Operators* page, wait for the *Status* field to report *Succeeded*.

[IMPORTANT]
====

If you are using the {loki-op} with the {clo}, the {clo} 5.9 or later requires the `v13` schema version in the `LokiStack` custom resource.

The correct way to add the `v13` schema version is the following:

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: loki.grafana.com/v1
kind: LokiStack
# ...
spec:
# ...
  storage:
    schemas:
    # ...
      version: v12 # <1>
    - effectiveDate: "<yyyy>-<mm>-<future_dd>" # <2>
      version: v13
# ...
----

> <1> Do not delete. Keep the `v12` configuration to avoid data loss.

Reviewer 3: - Customers might also still just have `v11`.
- They do not need to go though v12 to reach v13.
- Data is only written in a certain schema and never modified/updated to a newer one. That's why the new configuration needs to be in the future. And also why the schema configuration needs to continue to contain the old versions, so that this data stays readable.

Author: I've updated this line to as follows:
```
<1> Do not delete. Data persists in its original schema version. Keep the previous schema versions to avoid data loss.
```

. Click the *Red Hat OpenShift Logging* Operator.

. Click *Subscription*. In the *Subscription details* section, click the *Update channel* link. This link text might be *stable* or *stable-5.<y>*, depending on your current update channel.

. In the *Change Subscription Update Channel* window, select the latest major version update channel, *stable-5.<y>*, and click *Save*. Note the `cluster-logging.v5.<y>.<z>` version.

. Wait for a few seconds, and then go to *Operators* -> *Installed Operators* to verify that the {clo} version matches the latest `cluster-logging.v5.<y>.<z>` version.

. On the *Operators* -> *Installed Operators* page, wait for the *Status* field to report *Succeeded*.

. Add the `v13` schema version to the `LokiStack` custom resource:

> .. In the *Administrator* perspective of the web console, go to *Observe* -> *Alerting* to check for presence of a *LokistackSchemaUpgradesRequired* alert.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. In the *Administrator* perspective of the web console, go to *Observe* -> *Alerting* to check for the presence of a *LokistackSchemaUpgradesRequired* alert.
```

Author: TY. Fixed.

.. If there is a *LokistackSchemaUpgradesRequired* alert, edit the `LokiStack` custom resource to include the `v13` schema version:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: loki.grafana.com/v1
kind: LokiStack
# ...
spec:
# ...
  storage:
    schemas:
    # ...
      version: v12 # <1>
    - effectiveDate: "<yyyy>-<mm>-<future_dd>" # <2>
      version: v13
# ...
----

> <1> Do not delete. Keep the `v12` related configuration to avoid data loss.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<1> Do not delete. Keep the `v12` configuration to avoid data loss.
```

Author: TY. Fixed.

<2> Set a future date that has not yet started in the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) time zone.
+
[TIP]
====

> To edit the `LokiStack` custom resource, you can run the `oc edit` command:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Edit the `LokiStack` custom resource by running the `oc edit` command:
```

[source,terminal]
----
$ oc edit lokistack <name> -n openshift-logging
----
====

> .. On or after the specified `effectiveDate` date, verify successful upgrade to the `v13` schema version by checking for absence of a *LokistackSchemaUpgradesRequired* alert in the web console in *Administrator* -> *Observe* -> *Alerting*.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. On or after the specified `effectiveDate` date, verify successful upgrade to the `v13` schema version by checking for the absence of a *LokistackSchemaUpgradesRequired* alert in the web console in *Administrator* -> *Observe* -> *Alerting*.
```

Author: TY. Fixed.
